microFATE
=========

MicroFATE is basically a **Fate Core** hack, but stripped to the minimum, while 
attempting to give more importance to Aspects, Consequences and CaA Actions.

it is more of a hack than a "Fate Build" (in which you customize your dials),
because it changes core mechanics and concepts to simplify and accomodate to 
its adjustments.

This document assumes familiarity with Fate Core, and will only address
changes to the system mechanics, or note specific things that need to be
clarified.

Why does this exist?
--------------------

microFATE attempts to reduce the Fate RPG philosophies to its minimum
and most pure. That is: Aspects. To tell a collaborative story, while
still maintaining the mechanics that make it a game and not an improv
session, you don’t really need much more than Aspects and the Core
mechanics of the system.

This is useful when you want to prepare a one-shot or Scenario for Fate
but don’t want to do the usual “adaptation process” in which you decide
which dials to turn, which hacks to implement, or which Extras you need
to come up with.

Obviously this comes with a caveat: Your game will feel less deep than
the usual Fate Core or Accelerated setup. At the end of this document
you’ll find simple Extras or tools to add Stunts or tune certain dials.
You can add more options for your players as the sessions are played and
the characters improve. But be careful of the extent of your additions:
at a certain point, you might want to just go back to using Fate Core or
Accelerated. microFATE is most useful when you need to prep a quick game
without thinking about all the dials, extras, custom skill lists, etc.

microFATE also turns out to be useful for some players as a teaching
tool or “tutorial” for the Fate Paradigm. By only having the Aspect
mechanics (invokes/compels/CaA), that part of the game is constantly
highlighted, or in other words, not overshadowed by the more
“traditional” mechanics of Skills as simulationist stats, Stunts as
feats, resisting with stress as HP, etc.

No skills or Approaches
=======================

In microFATE your Character only has Aspects and Consequences.

When you do an Action, you roll at +0 by default.

If you invoke an Aspect as part of your Action, you gain +2 as usual,
but **the first invocation for the action is free** (it doesn’t require
a Fate Point and it doesn’t expend a free invoke).

Any other Aspect that you want to invoke as part of your action requires
the usual cost (a Fate Point or the expenditure of a free invoke if the
Aspect had those).

Aspects
-------

Starting Player Characters have 5 Aspects. Their types can vary from
game to game, but usually they are:

-  High Concept
-  Trouble
-  Relationship
-  Backstory
-  Other

To start the game, you need to have at least the High Concept and
Trouble defined. The others can be defined as you play your first
sessions.

Game and Scenario Aspects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is recommended that the group creates Aspects for the whole game or
campaign, and maybe for the scenario or current conflict as well. Use it
to define the genre and setting, and to enforce it by invoking it or
compelling characters with it.

True Immunity and Insta-kill Attacks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Because *Aspects are True*, depending on the wording, there are cases in
which they can give what is perceived as total immunity against certain
sources. For instance, Aspects like *Man of Steel*, *Godlike
Invulnerability* or *Can Only Be Harmed by Magic Sources *\ might make
mundane attacks (like melee weapons or bullets) completely ineffective
against that character. That is ok, it is accepted by design. Is what we
call *True Immunity*. In those cases, the GM should not require a roll
to Attack/Defend (and maybe not even Overcome/CaA as well), the attack
is described in the fiction but obviously fails, and the defense
succeeds automatically.

With that said, some players don’t like that level of absolute
invulnerability in their games. The are two ways to limit these
overpowered Aspects:

1. Write a similar but reduced version of the Aspect. Change the wording
   so that the Aspect can be used to gain a +2 when Defending from
   certain sources, but that it is not a strict denial of all damage
   (*Super resistance* or *Strong Magic Shield* could be good
   alternatives).
2. Allow those Aspects, but be very restrained at the time of giving
   them. Do not allow those freely, but with a cost (make them fight for
   it!) or make their effects temporary.

Or you can just allow them and trust that both GM and players will have
a good sense of storytelling, by always being mindful of good challenges
and drama (even when portraying extremely powerful characters in the
narrative!). After all, there are many stories about Superman or other
seemingly invulnerable heroes that are challenged in ways that somehow
bypass their extreme resistances and make a compelling narrative
nonetheless.

The same concept can be applied but to Attacks instead of defenses.
Think of insta-kill death-rays or the *Gaze of the Medusa* that
instantly turns you into a stone statue (effectively bypassing the
mechanics and taking out an opponent instantly). Those are called
*Insta-kill Attacks*. As you can imagine, they are not easily reflected
by Fate mechanics, at least not without having to change them or making
arbitrary rulings. You can either allow them but at a reduced strength
(so that you simulate a progressive effect; maybe it takes several
moments of gazing into the gorgon’s eyes before being completely
turned). Or you can turn the whole attack as a Challenge instead of a
Conflict: Try to avoid the insta-KO attack long enough; if you fail the
Challenge you are KO’d.

No Stress boxes, only Consequences
==================================

In microFATE there are no Stress boxes.

Player Characters can have 3 Consequences (1 mild, 1 moderate, 1 severe)
before being taken out.

Opposing characters or environmental hazards/challenges can have
different amounts (“slots”) of Consequences, depending on their
“narrative resistance”.

How Consequences work
---------------------

When a character does an Attack Action, instead of dealing Stress, they
deal Consequences to the opponent. See Action Outcomes for Consequence
severity depending on the result of your roll.

When a Character Defends and fails, their player has to decide if they
get taken out or suffer a Consequence. If they already have their slot
filled with another previous Consequence, they have to fill the next
higher available slot. If they cannot take more Consequences of the
required severity, they are automatically taken out.

Keep in mind that Consequences always come with a free invoke for the
side of whoever applied that Consequence on your Character.

Removing Consequences
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Consequences have to be treated before being removed (unless the fiction
makes them obsolete in some way, but that’s unlikely).

If you don’t do anything about them, they could just stay as a negative
Aspect on your Character. Oftentimes, an untreated Consequence
(specially a physical ailment) might get worse. The GM might tell you to
rename it to a worse state or even move it to a more severe slot if you
don’t do anything about it.

To start the recovery process of a Consequence, you (or an ally, or an
NPC) will have to do an Overcome Action. The Default difficulty is 2 for
Mild, 4 for Moderate and 6 for Severe Consequences. Failure might mean
that you didn’t treat the Consequence, or you do but at a serious cost.

If the treatment is successful, you must rename the Consequence to an
appropriate “healing state”. It will then be completely healed (and
thus, removed from your Character) in a period of time depending on
their severity:

-  Mild consequences take one full scene after treatment to clear.
-  Moderate consequences last longer, taking a full session after
   treatment to clear.
-  Severe consequences only clear when you reach an Advancement.

Opposition Types
----------------

Minions
~~~~~~~

**A Minion doesn’t have Consequence slots**. They are nameless henchmen or lesser adversaries. Once successfully
attacked, they are taken out.

Menaces
~~~~~~~

**A Menace has 1 mild and 1 moderate Consequence slots**. Usually, any named NPC in a Conflict is at least a Menace. A group of
henchmen could also be considered as a single Menace.

Nemesis
~~~~~~~

**A Nemesis has 1 mild, 1 moderate and 1 severe Consequence slots**,
effectively putting them at the same level as Player Characters.

A Nemesis is usually an important adversary that can give the player
characters a hard time. If the GM wants to make them even more hard to
be taken out, they can give them even more Consequence slots, but they
should also consider giving them “invulnerability” Aspects instead:
since Aspects Are True, when they declare that the actor cannot be
affected or harmed by something, it doesn’t matter how hard the player
Characters attack with that source, it won’t make a dent.

Hazards and Traps
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Hazards and Traps are usually not sentient obstacles, but could also be
“taken out” of the Conflict with attacks (If the GM wants to treat them
as regular obstacles but with more narrative weight, consider making
them a Challenge).

When you want your Hazard or Trap to be something that the Player
Characters can actively disable with some sort of Attack (it doesn’t
have to be physical or brute force actions), **you can give them
Condition slots. 1 mild and 1 moderate is a good default.** These
Consequences should represent the mechanisms of the device failing, the
obstacle’s power dwindling, or something along those lines. When it runs
out of Consequences and is effectively taken out, you can consider it
deactivated or disabled.

Some hazards could be passive opposition that only cause negative
effects if the player Characters fail on their Overcome rolls. Others
could be active actors that do Attack actions on the Characters (Hidden
darts, rolling boulders, a far away sniper, etc). In those cases, they
get a turn just like other adversary NPC, and they can do Attack Actions
(and sometimes Create an Advantage Actions too!).

Actions
=======

Action Outcomes
---------------

Fail
~~~~

If you roll lower than your opposition, you fail.

Succeed
~~~~~~~

If you roll equal to or higher than your opposition by 1 or 2 shifts,
you succeed.

Exceed
~~~~~~

If you roll higher than your opposition by 3 or more shifts, you succeed
with style (a Critical hit!).

Action Types
------------

Overcome
~~~~~~~~

*When your objective is to overcome an obstacle that is in your way...*

If you **Fail**: You either simply fail, or you succeed at a serious
cost.

If you **Succeed**: You simply succeed, without any cost.

If you **Exceed**: You succeed and create a Boost.

Create an Advantage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*When your objective is to do something that benefits you or your
allies, hinders an opponent, or changes the situation....*

If you **Fail**: Don’t create/alter an Aspect, or create/alter it but an
opponent gets the free invoke.

If you **Succeed**: You create/alter an Aspect and put a free invoke on
it.

If you **Exceed**: You create/alter an Aspect and put two free invokes
on it.

Attack
~~~~~~

*When your action’s outcome is to take out the opposition or place
Consequences on them…*

If you **Fail**: You don’t place any Consequences or take out your
opponent.

If you **Succeed**: You inflict a Mild Consequence on your opponent.

If you **Exceed**: You inflict a Moderate Consequence on your opponent.

Defend
~~~~~~

*When you attempt to avoid an Attack or prevent someone from Creating an
Advantage against you…*

If you **Fail**: You take a Consequence related to the Attack, get taken
out, or have an Advantage created against you.

If you **Succeed**: You avoid the attack or the attempt to gain
advantage on you.

If you **Exceed**: You avoid the attack or the attempt to gain advantage
on you, and also create a Boost.

Difficulty
----------

Difficulty for an Action roll can be either fixed or opposed.

When you attempt something against the environment or an entity that
cannot perform an action by themselves, it is normally a fixed
difficulty. It ranges from 0 to 8, being 2 to 4 the default for most
cases.

When your Action is made against an opponent or entity that can actively
defend, it is normally an opposed roll, with the defender setting the
difficulty; whoever rolls higher succeeds. A tie always goes for the
attacker (or the initiating actor).

Fate Points
===========

Each Player Character starts the Session with 3 Fate Points. The GM gets
a number of Fate Points equal to the number of Player Characters x 3
(this means that you need 6 Fate Point tokens per player).

When players spend Fate Points, they go to the GM’s pool (unless they
are compelling another PC!).

The GM only spends Fate Points in two situations:

1. when compelling a Player Character. The Fate Point goes to the
   compelled Character.
2. when GM controlled NPCs invoke Aspects. The Fate Point goes to the
   most hindered PC by that action. When that’s not immediately clear,
   choose who gets the Fate Point:

   1. The Character with less Fate Points.
   2. Let the players decide.
   3. The GM decides.

This means that the GM pool of Fate Points is limited by design. If the
GM runs out of Fate Points, they cannot compel Player Characters nor
invoke NPC Aspects. This also means that the Players (or even a single
player) could theoretically hoard all of the Fate Points from the table
and refrain from using them. This is a valid tactic, self-balanced by
the fact that in microFATE all PCs and NPCs have a free first invoke on
each Action, and because players can compel each other, effectively
passing Fate Points between themselves. This way, in microFATE the Fate
Point Pool functions as a stronger equalizer in terms of tension and
comeback potential than in Fate Core.

Using Fate Points
-----------------

Very similar to Fate Core, players can use Fate Points to:

-  Declare a minor detail or fact (approved or vetoed by the GM)
-  Invoke an Aspect and gain a +2 to their Action roll
-  Invoke an Aspect and reroll all of their dice on their Action roll
-  Compel another Player Character’s Aspects, giving the Fate Point to
   that player
-  Deny the activation of a Compel, paying a Fate Point to the player
   (or GM) that initiated the compel

Conflicts
=========

A Conflict is a type of Scene in which the PCs are pitted against one or
more opponents or teams of antagonists, their objectives are opposed or
collide somehow, and there is a possibility of forcefully “taking
enemies out of the action”.

Objectives by side
------------------

Before the Conflict starts, both players and the GM must agree on the
objective of the Conflict for all sides. Writing it down is recommended.
Usually the Player Characters want to achieve something and there is
opposition from GM NPCs that want something that conflicts with the
Characters’ objective.

This is important and needs to be clear during the Conflict, because
Concessions are based on the clarity of the objectives from both sides.

Turn Order
----------

When you need to determine Turn Order (mostly during Conflicts), have
everyone roll normally (+0), and add bonuses with Aspects as usual
(first invoked one is free). Highest goes first, ties act simultaneously
(or the players involved decide who goes first).

It is recommended to do this only once at the start of a Conflict, but
if the context changes and the GM feels it warrants a new check of Turn
Order, you can do it again, and as many times as you want.

On the other hand, some GMs prefer to use “popcorn initiative”: The
Character most likely to act first given the context of the fiction
takes a turn, and when it ends, they choose the next Character in the
queue (allies or enemies!). Repeat that process until all of the
involved actors in the Conflict had their turn.

Conceding a Conflict
--------------------

Concessions work just like in Fate Core: if you concede a Conflict, you
don’t gain what you were looking for, but you don’t get taken out.
Player Characters gain 1 Fate Point plus another one per each
Consequence they gained during this Conflict (GM controlled NPCs gain
nothing!).

When the players concede, the GM will propose a negative outcome that is
not as bad as if they were all taken out, but that still implies they
lost their objective. They can negotiate the details (or propose another
outcome of similar significance) but ultimately the GM has the last
word.

The same applies when NPCs concede, but the players have the last word
as to what is an acceptable compromise.

Keep in mind that conceding is meant to give the acting character(s) an
out; As long as the proposition doesn’t feel extremely fantastic or too
much of a stretch, the opposing side should accept it in benefit of a
smooth narrative.

Zones
-----

TODO

Moving to one adjacent Zone is free; moving more is an Overcome Action

Pushing someone to another adjacent zone is an opposed Overcome action

Each Zone must have at least one Aspect

Barriers
--------

TODO

A Barrier is an Aspect between two or more zones that needs to be
Overcome to traverse

Challenges
==========

When the Player Characters want to achieve something complex that cannot
be resolved with a single roll, have them do a Challenge: a series of
Actions tied together to accomplish an epic result.

Trials Challenge
----------------

Set a high difficulty for the Challenge (10 or more). The Player
Characters need to do a series of Create an Advantage or Overcome
Actions (the Trials). Positive results (+1 or more) add up to the
overall effort. Negative results (-1 or less) subtract from the effort.

When the target difficulty number is achieved, the Challenge is
completed successfully.

A Challenge can also fail: The GM sets a maximum number of Trials before
the Challenge starts (3~4, or the same as the number of players are good
defaults). If the Player Characters cannot achieve the target difficulty
total after all Trial attempts are rolled, the Challenge fails.

Doom Clock Challenge
--------------------

Doom Clock Challenges are very similar to Trial Challenges, with the
difference that instead of defining a maximum number of Trials, the GM
sets a time track, or “doom clock”.

The clock (or time track) consists of 3 to 6 events that will happen in
sequence, with the last being the worst outcome that could happen in
detriment of the PCs.

The difficulty for the Challenge works the same as with the Trials
Challenge: the GM sets a high number (10 or more), and the shifts of
each action rolled by the PCs add to that total. But everytime the PCs
make an action, the GM marks progress in the doom clock and activates
the following event.

The Challenge ends when the PCs reach the total difficulty. It’s up to
them “how fast” they do so.

This type of Challenge is useful to represent impending danger and a
sense of urgency: If the PCs don’t finish the Challenge fast enough,
more bad things happen. This Challenge indirectly forces them to spend
their resources now (Fate Points, free invokes, etc) to avoid future
problems (while having to make the hard choice of being out of resources
for the following encounters).

Tug-Of-War Challenge
--------------------

This Challenge type is ideal for two sides or teams competing against
each other (Keep in mind that if violence arises, the scene must evolve
into a Conflict. Attack actions are not allowed in Challenges). It is
ideal for Chase scenes, sports matches, and similar situations involving
two teams.

Set a track (imaginary or written down in paper) that ranges from -5 to
+5, starting at 0.

The Player characters must get the progress track to +5 or more; The
NPCs need to take it all the way down to -5 or less to win.

Each side takes turns doing an action:

-  Create an Advantage actions can place Aspects on the scene. Ideally
   the team creates or discovers Aspects to get their benefits in a
   future turn.
-  Overcome actions can make progress in the tug-of-war track. A Success
   means making 1 point of progress; an Excess means either making 2
   points of progress, or 1 and creating a Boost. Failure means there is
   no progress.

PCs add points of progress to the track when they succeed, while the NPC
team subtracts points.

When the track reaches -5 or +5 the Challenge ends, with the PCs either
losing or winning, respectively.

Advancement
===========

In microFATE, Characters advance by gaining new Aspects (and/or
modifying existing ones). Advancement happens when the GM deems fit
(normally after the Characters made some notable progress or finished an
Adventure or Scenario).

When Player Characters advance, they can add a new Aspect and/or modify
an older one they have. There is no limit to the amount of Aspects a
Character can have. Both the addition of a new Aspect or the
modification of an old one must be justified narratively.

During Advancement Characters can also remove a Severe Consequence that
they had, provided it is already in a “healing state”.

Gaining new Aspects as “debt”
-----------------------------

Sometimes the fiction requires that a Character gains a new Aspect (be
it because they acquired an important item, a new trait or connection,
or whatever that would be narratively important). In this case, the GM
can allow the addition of the Aspect, but the player must mark that they
have a “debt” to be paid during the next Advance. When that happens,
that Character does not gain a new Aspect, but effectively pays for the
one they acquired before. It is recommended that only one Aspect (at
most two) is granted “as debt” in this way.

Stunts
======

(Optional rule)

It is possible to expand microFATE with Stunts to give more depth to
Character builds. By the nature of this hack, Stunts can’t refer to
Skills or Weapon/Armor ratings etc, since those are not present in
microFATE. They must refer to generic situations and/or modify one of
the four basic actions. Or they could tinker with other core mechanics
like zone movement, barriers, action resolution, healing consequences,
etc.

Some cases might seem too similar to just invoking an Aspect. The main
difference is that the Stunt effects are always active without having to
pay for an invocation, hence it is important to make them more
constrained (in specificity of a contextual situation) so that they
don’t imbalance the main mechanic of Aspects.

Stunt templates
---------------

[Stunt Name]

Gain +2 to [Action Type] when [specific or niche circumstance or
context].

[Stunt Name]

Gain +1 to [Action Type] and [Another Action Type] when [specific or
niche circumstance or context].

Stunt Examples
--------------

ToDo

Hardcoded Aspect Types
======================

(optional rule)

A good way to make Character Creation more interesting and give players
something more to build upon (while limiting them to a specific genre)
is to give Hardcoded Aspect Types to the starting Aspect list. Similar
to how you have a High Concept and Trouble slots, the other Aspects can
also have their types established beforehand.

For instance, a Superhero game could have the Aspect Types be defined
as:

-  Epithet
-  Personal Issue
-  Identity
-  Nemesis
-  Weakness
-  Connection
-  Catchphrase
-  Motivation

A high fantasy adventure game could have this list:

-  Archetype
-  Trouble
-  Relationship
-  Ancestry
-  Unique Item
-  Faction

Since Characters have a maximum of 5 Aspects to start with, players can
choose which types to create from that list up to that max, but they
cannot deviate from it. They must create one Aspect of each category.

Aspects and Free Invokes
========================

Aspects work just like in Fate Core. The new addition is that you can
place Free Invokes on an Aspect your own Character has, which is useful
if you want to stack multiple invokes but you don’t have enough Fate
Points. It will take more time (multiple successful CaA actions to place
the free invokes) but it will not require Fate Points. In the fiction
this represents a character preparing or getting ready to do something
big.

How to track Free Invokes
-------------------------

It is imperative that you keep track of the Free Invokes on Aspects by
their team, since both Player Characters and the opposing team can have
them (and they can’t use the invokes that belong to the other side!). A
good way to do this is by using different colors (blue or green for
players, red for enemies).

If you are playing on a table, another option is to place small colored
tokens on each Aspect. A blue token represents a single free invoke for
the players; a red one is only usable by the opposing team. When used,
simply remove the token from the Aspect, representing that you spent the
free invocation.

Extras
======

Strategic Crunch
----------------

TODO (team weight, zone pushing, etc)

-  Team weight (charge! Doubles your weight and can Push)
-  Contested movement (non-free, requires Overcome)
-  Push/Pull opponent 1 zone
-  Barriers
-  Weapon/Armor Ratings (bonuses but only for successful hits)
-  Other advantages that can be achieved by simply creating Aspects
   (flanking, full defense, high ground, etc).

