Aspects
=======

Starting Player Characters have 5 Aspects. Their types can vary from
game to game, but usually they are:

-  High Concept
-  Trouble
-  Relationship
-  Backstory
-  Objective

To start the game, you need to have at least the High Concept and
Trouble defined. The others can be defined as you play your first
sessions.

Game and Scenario Aspects
-------------------------

It is recommended that the group creates Aspects for the whole game or
campaign, and maybe for the scenario or current conflict as well. Use it
to define the genre and setting, and to enforce it by invoking it or
compelling characters with it.

.. _immunity-aspects:

True Immunity and Insta-kill Attacks
------------------------------------

Because *Aspects are True*, depending on the wording, there are cases in
which they can give what is perceived as total immunity against certain
sources. For instance, Aspects like ``Man of Steel``, ``Godlike
Invulnerability`` or ``Can Only Be Harmed by Magic Sources`` might make
mundane attacks (like melee weapons or bullets) completely ineffective
against that character. That is ok, it is accepted by design. Is what we
call *True Immunity*. In those cases, the GM should not require a roll
to Attack/Defend (and maybe not even Overcome/CaA as well), the attack
is described in the fiction but obviously fails, and the defense
succeeds automatically.

With that said, some players don’t like that level of absolute
invulnerability in their games. The are two ways to limit these
overpowered Aspects:

1. Write a similar but reduced version of the Aspect. Change the wording
   so that the Aspect can be used to gain a +2 when Defending from
   certain sources, but that it is not a strict denial of all damage
   (``Super resistance`` or ``Strong Magic Shield`` could be good
   alternatives).
2. Allow those Aspects, but be very restrained at the time of giving
   them. Do not allow those freely, but with a cost (make them fight for
   it!) or make their effects temporary.

Or you can just allow them and trust that both GM and players will have
a good sense of storytelling, by always being mindful of good challenges
and drama (even when portraying extremely powerful characters in the
narrative!). After all, there are many stories about Superman or other
seemingly invulnerable heroes that are challenged in ways that somehow
bypass their extreme resistances and make a compelling narrative
nonetheless.

The same concept can be applied but to Attacks instead of defenses.
Think of insta-kill death-rays or the ``Gaze of the Medusa`` that
instantly turns you into a stone statue (effectively bypassing the
mechanics and taking out an opponent instantly). Those are called
*Insta-kill Attacks*. As you can imagine, they are not easily reflected
by Fate mechanics, at least not without having to change them or making
arbitrary rulings. You can either allow them but at a reduced strength
(so that you simulate a progressive effect; maybe it takes several
moments of gazing into the gorgon’s eyes before being completely
turned). Or you can turn the whole attack as a Challenge instead of a
Conflict: Try to avoid the insta-KO attack long enough; if you fail the
Challenge you are KO’d.
