.. _challenges:

Challenges
==========

When the Player Characters want to achieve something complex that cannot
be resolved with a single roll, have them do a Challenge: a series of
Actions tied together to accomplish an epic result.

Trials Challenge
----------------

Set a high difficulty for the Challenge (10 or more). The Player
Characters need to do a series of Create an Advantage or Overcome
Actions (the Trials). Positive results (+1 or more) add up to the
overall effort. Negative results (-1 or less) subtract from the effort.

When the target difficulty number is achieved, the Challenge is
completed successfully.

A Challenge can also fail: The GM sets a maximum number of Trials before
the Challenge starts (3~4, or the same as the number of players are good
defaults). If the Player Characters cannot achieve the target difficulty
total after all Trial attempts are rolled, the Challenge fails.

Doom Clock Challenge
--------------------

Doom Clock Challenges are very similar to Trial Challenges, with the
difference that instead of defining a maximum number of Trials, the GM
sets a time track, or “doom clock”.

The clock (or time track) consists of 3 to 6 events that will happen in
sequence, with the last being the worst outcome that could happen in
detriment of the PCs.

The difficulty for the Challenge works the same as with the Trials
Challenge: the GM sets a high number (10 or more), and the shifts of
each action rolled by the PCs add to that total. But everytime the PCs
make an action, the GM marks progress in the doom clock and activates
the following event.

The Challenge ends when the PCs reach the total difficulty. It’s up to
them “how fast” they do so.

This type of Challenge is useful to represent impending danger and a
sense of urgency: If the PCs don’t finish the Challenge fast enough,
more bad things happen. This Challenge indirectly forces them to spend
their resources now (Fate Points, free invokes, etc) to avoid future
problems (while having to make the hard choice of being out of resources
for the following encounters).

Tug-Of-War Challenge
--------------------

This Challenge type is ideal for two sides or teams competing against
each other (Keep in mind that if violence arises, the scene must evolve
into a Conflict. Attack actions are not allowed in Challenges). It is
ideal for Chase scenes, sports matches, and similar situations involving
two teams.

Set a track (imaginary or written down in paper) that ranges from -5 to
+5, starting at 0.

The Player characters must get the progress track to +5 or more; The
NPCs need to take it all the way down to -5 or less to win.

Each side takes turns doing an action:

-  Create an Advantage actions can place Aspects on the scene. Ideally
   the team creates or discovers Aspects to get their benefits in a
   future turn.
-  Overcome actions can make progress in the tug-of-war track. A Success
   means making 1 point of progress; an Excess means either making 2
   points of progress, or 1 and creating a Boost. Failure means there is
   no progress.

PCs add points of progress to the track when they succeed, while the NPC
team subtracts points.

When the track reaches -5 or +5 the Challenge ends, with the PCs either
losing or winning, respectively.
